---
title: "Ship designer"
categories: ["4.2", "Warfare"]
---

# Ship designer

The **Ship Designer** (Hotkey F9) is where players may create, update and customize ship templates and defense stations. If a ship of a design is under construction or being upgraded, the design cannot be edited. Many naval strategies advise that their empires deploy several types of warships to fill different tactical roles and face different opponents, and it is convenient for these to have different class names.

Clicking the Auto-Generate box on the lower left of the menu orders computer designers to continually update ship designs based on the latest technology research and the selected ship role. Note that they do not take account of the enemies that the fleet is facing or may face, so it might choose components that an opponent can counter instead of a less up-to-date component that has proven successful. For example, the computer might auto-generate a design with an advanced laser that is statistically superior although the current enemy has heavily invested in shield technology that will heavily impair laser weapons but is vulnerable to attacks with the existing missile weapons.

Direct involvement in ship design is optional. An alert icon will appear if a ship design is obsolete, and a toggle enables automatic upgrading of components for player convenience. Stellaris can be played without touching this menu very often, but it is always advisable to be aware of the strengths and weaknesses of current and potential enemies.

## Cost

Every ship design has an associated cost to build. This is the sum of the costs of its sections and components. The build time is determined by the ship type. The base monthly upkeep of a ship is determined as a percentage of its total build cost. Upkeep is split into 2 parts:

- Hull Upkeep: determined by the ship type.
- Component Upkeep: around 0.833% of its build cost in Energy Credits and around 0.15% of its build cost in other resources.

## Upgrading

If a ship design is edited, a fleet containing ships of that design can be ordered to return to a shipyard to upgrade. Upgrading will take all ships of a given name to the most recent design with the same name (e.g. a Victory-class will upgrade to the design for the Victory-class). Switching designs is done in the fleet manager via the Retrofit button - in this case, "upgrading" the fleet will switch all ships of the appropriate hull type to the newly selected ship design. This is useful for maintaining two designs of a type and switching between them.

If you delete a ship design that is currently in use, ships in a fleet will automatically be designated for a retrofit to the most recently changed ship design of that hull type. There must always be one design per hull type. The upgrade button will send the fleet back to a shipyard to change designs. (e.g. if you have a fleet of Victory-class corvettes and then make a Constellation-class of corvette and delete the design for the Victory-class, all Victory-class corvettes will be automatically marked for upgrading to the Constellation-class)

The upgrade cost is the difference in build cost between the new ship type and the old ship type. This will not refund resources if the new design is cheaper or uses different strategic resources in construction.

## Power

Power is generated by the ship's reactor, as well as any Reactor Booster components the ship might have. Many components and subsystems require power to operate. A ship design cannot be approved if it has a negative power balance.

Excess power will give a small bonus to the ship's evasion, speed, and weapon damage using the following formula: excess power bonus = 10% * (1 - required power / supplied power)

## Types

The type of the ship determines its base statistics.

### Mechanical ships

Mechanical ships are available only to empire with a mechanical shipset.

Empires with the Progenitor Hive origin can construct Offspring versions of Corvette, Destroyer, Cruiser and Battleship ships, which are visually larger, that have their hull, armor and shields increased by 50%, their weapon range increased by 25%, their cost and upkeep doubled, and an additional core component slot dedicated to Offspring Oversight.

Empires that reach Galactic Hyperthermia crisis level 3 can construct Ember Cruisers regardless of their shipset. Ember Cruisers are identical to cruisers but their cost and upkeep is not affected by installed components. They have have a fixed cost of 225 Crystallized Entropy that cannot be reduced and an upkeep of 1.2 Energy and 0.4 Crystallized Entropy which can be reduced.

Empires that reach Galactic Hyperthermia crisis level 5 can construct Ember Battleships regardless of their shipset. Ember Battleships are identical to battleships but their cost and upkeep is not affected by installed components. They have have a fixed cost of 550 Crystallized Entropy that cannot be reduced and an upkeep of 2.4 Energy and 0.8 Crystallized Entropy which can be reduced. They can also equip the Lensed Paralyzer weapon component.

| Type | Sections | Command points/Ship Size | Base cost | Time Build time | Logistics upkeep | Small Slot Equivalent (W/U/A) | | | Base hull | Base evasion | Base speed | Disengagement Chance |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Corvette | 1 | 1 | 30 | 60 | 0.1 | 3 | 3 | 1 | 200 | 60% | 160 | 1.0 |
| Frigate | 1 | 1 | 30 | 90 | 0.1 | 3 | 4 | 1 | 400 | 20% | 120 | 1.0 |
| Destroyer | 2 | 2 | 60 | 120 | 0.2 | 6 | 6 | 1-2 | 600 | 35% | 140 | 1.5 |
| Cruiser | 3 | 4 | 120 | 240 | 0.4 | 12 | 16 | 2-3 | 1800 | 10% | 120 | 1.5 |
| Battleship | 3 | 8 | 240 | 480 | 0.8 | 24 | 24 | 2-3 | 3000 | 5% | 100 | 1.25 |

### Biological ships

Biological ships are only available to empires that use a biological shipset. Instead of sections biological ships have three growth stages, with the latter two having to be unlocked through research. Reactor output is increased by 25% for ships in the Mature growth stage and by 50% for ships in the Elder growth stage.

Empires with the Progenitor Hive origin can construct Offspring versions of biological ships, which are visually larger, that have their hull, armor and shields increased by 50%, their weapon range increased by 25%, their cost and upkeep doubled, and an additional core component slot dedicated to Offspring Oversight.

| Type | Growth stage | Naval capacity/Ship size | Base cost | Time Build time | Logistics upkeep | Small Slot Equivalent (W/U/A) | | | Base hull | Base evasion | CPs | Base speed | Disengagement Chance |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Mauler | Juvenile | 1 | 105 | 75 | 0.1 | 3 | 2 | 1 | 300 | 40% | 1 | 160 | 1.0 |
| Mature | 1.5 | 210 | 150 | 0.2 | 4 | 4 | 1 | 450 | 30% | | | | |
| Elder | 2 | 325 | 300 | 0.4 | 6 | 6 | 2 | 600 | 20% | | | | |
| Weaver | Juvenile | 2 | 210 | 120 | 0.2 | 6 | 6 | 2 | 600 | 35% | 2 | 140 | 1.5 |
| Mature | 3 | 420 | 240 | 0.4 | 9 | 8 | 2 | 900 | 35% | | | | |
| Elder | 4 | 840 | 480 | 0.8 | 12 | 10 | 3 | 1200 | 20% | | | | |
| Harbinger | Juvenile | 4 | 420 | 240 | 0.4 | 12 | 16 | 2 | 1800 | 10% | 4 | 120 | 1.5 |
| Mature | 6 | 840 | 480 | 0.8 | 18 | 20 | 2 | 2700 | 10% | | | | |
| Elder | 8 | 1680 | 960 | 1.6 | 24 | 24 | 3 | 3600 | 5% | | | | |
| Stinger | Juvenile | 8 | 840 | 480 | 0.8 | 24 | 20 | 1 | 3000 | 10% | 8 | 120 | 1.25 |
| Mature | 12 | 1680 | 960 | 1.6 | 36 | 28 | 2 | 4500 | 10% | | | | |
| Elder | 16 | 3360 | 1920 | 3.2 | 48 | 36 | 3 | 6000 | 5% | | | | |

### Hard Cap ships

Unlike most other ships, the following ships have a hard limit for how many a single empire can own. The mechanical and biological versions of these ships are statistically identical, and only the Titan ships vary in their base cost.

| Type | Sections | Command points/Ship size | Mech. Cost | Bio. Cost | Time Build time | Small Slot Equivalent (W/U/A) | | | Base hull | Base evasion | Base speed | Disengagement Chance |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Titan | 3 | 16 | 480 | 1680 | 1800 | 40 | 48 | 3 | 15000 | 5% | 100 | 1.25 |
| Juggernaut | 1 | 32 | 960 | | 3600 | 48 | 84 | 4 | 100000 | 2% | 100 | No |
| Colossus | 1 | 32 | 10000 | | 20000 | W | 24 | 0 | 30000 | 2% | 80 | No |

### Defensive Structures

All defensive structures have no Evasion or Disengagement Chance. Deep Space Citadels' cost and upkeep are not impacted by installed components.

| Type | Sections | Command points/Ship size | Mechanical cost | Biological cost | Time Build time | Small Slot Equivalent (W/U/A) | | | Base hull | Base armor | Shield Base shields |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Defense Platform | 2 | 1 | 60 | 105 30 | 60 | 8 | 12 | 2 | 3000 | 0 | 0 |
| Ion Cannon | 1 | 8 | 1000 | | 480 | 16 | 24 | 3 | 10000 | 0 | 0 |
| Deep Space Citadel I | 1 | 8 | 1000 2500 | 875 250 2500 | 720 | 33 | 32 | 1 | 40000 | 20000 | 20000 |
| Deep Space Citadel II | 1 | 12 | 1250 100 2500 | 2188 625 100 2500 | 1080 | 57 | 64 | 2 | 80000 | 40000 | 40000 |
| Deep Space Citadel III | 1 | 16 | 3500 500 5000 | 6125 1750 500 5000 | 1440 | 77 | 96 | 3 | 160000 | 80000 | 80000 |

### Mechanical fallen empire ships

Mechanical fallen empire ships are normally only available to fallen empires that use a mechanical shipset. However empires that take the Cosmogenesis ascension perk, reach the required Crisis Level and use a mechanical shipset can research the technology to build these ships. They only have one section each.

| Type | Command points/Ship size | Base cost | Time Build time | Small Slot Equivalent (W/U/A) | | | Base hull | Base evasion | Base speed | Disengagement Chance |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Riddle Escort | 2 | 500 | 200 | 16/14 | 12 | 2 | 1000 | 50% | 140 | 1.5 |
| Enigma Battlecruiser | 8 | 2000 | 600 | 40 | 32 | 3 | 5000 | 10% | 100 | 1.0 |
| Paradox Titan | 16 | 10000 | 1800 | 88 | 80 | 4 | 20000 | 2% | 100 | 0.5 |

### Biological fallen empire ships

Biological fallen empire ships are normally only available to the Shattered Fragments fallen empires. However empires that take the Cosmogenesis ascension perk, reach the required Crisis Level and use a biological shipset can research the technology to build these ships. They only have one section and growth stage each. For the purposes of the hard cap Cryptic Stinger is considered a titan, each taking half the regular titan limit.

| Type | Command points/Ship size | Base cost | Time Build time | Small Slot Equivalent (W/U/A) | | | Base hull | Base evasion | Base speed | Disengagement Chance |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Cipher Mauler | 2 | 420 | 300 | 12 | 8 | 2 | 600 | 20% | 160 | 1.0 |
| Quandary Weaver | 4 | 840 | 480 | 18 | 10 | 3 | 1200 | 20% | 140 | 1.5 |
| Maze Harbinger | 8 | 1680 | 960 | 32 | 24 | 3 | 3600 | 5% | 120 | 1.5 |
| Cryptic Stinger | 16 | 3360 | 1920 | 80 | 48 | 3 | 6000 | 5% | 120 | 0.5 |

### Menacing ships

Menacing ships are only available to empires that took the Galactic Nemesis ascension perk and reached the required Crisis Level. Their cost and upkeep are not impacted by installed components but can be reduced by percentage modifiers. They only have one section each.

| Type | Command points/Ship size | Cost | Time Build time | Small Slot Equivalent (W/U/A) | | | Base hull | Base evasion | Base speed | Disengagement Chance | Upkeep | Upkeep |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Menacing Corvette | 1 | 300 | 30 | 3 | 3 | 2 | 350 | 60% | 160 | 1.0 | 0.30 | 0.20 |
| Menacing Destroyer | 2 | 550 | 60 | 6 | 6 | 2 | 700 | 25% | 140 | 1.5 | 0.60 | 0.40 |
| Menacing Cruiser | 4 | 900 | 120 | 10 | 12 | 2 | 2000 | 10% | 140 | 1.5 | 1.20 | 0.80 |
| Star-Eater | 32 | 10000 | 6000 | 53 | 80 | 4 | 150000 | 5% | 120 | No | 0 | 0 |

### Nanite ships

Nanite ships are available only to empires that have adopted the Nanotech traditions. The Flood of Supremacy tradition unlocks Nanite Swarmer ships and the Nanite Augmentations tradition unlocks the Nanite Interdictor. Nanite ships have no upkeep, and their cost is not impacted by installed components, but they can be reduced by percentage modifiers. They only have one section each.

| Type | Command points/Ship size | Cost | Time Build time | Small Slot Equivalent (W/U/A) | | | Base hull | Base armor | Hull and armor regen | Base evasion | Base speed | Disengagement Chance |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Nanite Swarmer | 1 | 500 | 24 | 4 | 0 | 1 | 50 | 100 | 5 | 60% | 140 | 1.0 |
| Nanite Interdictor | 3 | 7500 | 240 | 14 | 12 | 1 | 2000 | 1500 | 15 | 20% | 120 | 1.25 |

## Components

Components are the individual systems and modules that define the capabilities of a ship, including weapons, defenses, hyperdrives, and utility systems. Most components have an individual cost that adds to build cost and to upkeep cost for ships with upkeep costs. The initial cost may be in Alloys or any of several strategic resources, but upkeep costs are limited to Energy and Alloys. Downgrading components or leaving slots empty can lower the build and upkeep costs of ships of that design. When changing components in a design, ships can be upgraded at a shipyard for the change in costs (downgrading designs is also done with the "upgrade" button, but will return resources). Upgrading ships when you do not have sufficient resources will cause them to wait at the shipyard until the resources become available and upgrade as soon as the resources become available. If you have neither reserves nor income of the required resources (e.g. you have 0(+0) Dark Matter for Dark Matter Thrusters) then the ships will idle at the shipyard indefinitely.

All Ships have similar Core components , displayed on the right side of the star-background part of the ship designer UI. Most of these slots cannot be left empty (the exception being an FTL Drive, but this component is necessary for inter-system travel; a ship without one will be stuck in the system it was built in). Immobile ship types (Defense Platforms and Ion Cannons) have limited slots to reflect that they are immobile. Titans and Juggernauts have an additional slot for auras. The article on core components goes into detail on what options are available, what stats those options have, and any special mechanics related to the components.

All Ships have slots for Weapon components and Utility components . These slots can be left empty. What specific slots are available will change based on what Sections are used in the design (see below). Weapon component slots are at the top of the star background part of the UI, separated by section. Utility component slots are on the bottom, also separated by section. There are a great amount of options for these types of slots, so please reference the articles on each type for what can be fitted in the slots as well as statistics and mechanics.

## Sections

Each ship and station is made up of 1-3 sections, and each section may have its own design. Ship section designs vary based on where they are in the ship (bow, core, stern), while station section designs are all the same. Each section design has space for a variety of offensive and defensive modules. For example, one station section may be designed to carry a single large weapon or four small weapons. Changing sections is done by clicking the section name in the top-center of the Ship Designer UI, above the star background. Changing sections will reset all component slots to being empty.

To add an item to a module, click on the module (in the center part of the menu, identified by , , , , , , , , , , ) to see what items can be added.

The components that can be placed in , , , and weapon slots, as well as , , , , and slots, can be found on the Weapon components page. The components that can be placed in , , and utility slots, as well as slots, are found on the Utility components page.

Weapon slots trade at a fixed ratio, with the following being equivalent:

- 1×
- 2× or
- 4× or
- 8× or

The only exception is the Destroyer section Bow / Picket Ship, which lacks 1× or compared to the other sections.

**Corvette sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Interceptor | 3 | 3 1 |
| Picket Ship | 2 1 | 3 1 |

**Frigate sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Missile Boat | 1 1 | 4 1 |

**Destroyer sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Artillery | 1 | 6 |
| Gunship | 2 1 | 6 |
| Picket Ship | 2 1 | 6 |

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Gunship | 1 | 1 |
| Interceptor | 2 | 2 |
| Picket Ship | 2 | 1 |

**Cruiser sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Artillery | 1 | 4 |
| Broadside | 2 | 4 |
| Torpedo | 2 1 | 4 |

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Artillery | 1 1 | 4 |
| Broadside | 3 | 4 |
| Hangar | 2 1 | 4 |
| Torpedo | 2 2 | 4 |

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Broadside | 1 | 2 |
| Gunship | 2 | 3 |

**Battleship sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Artillery | 2 | 3 |
| Broadside | 2 1 1 | 3 |
| Hangar | 1 2 1 | 3 |
| Spinal Mount | 1 | 3 |

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Artillery | 3 | 3 |
| Broadside | 2 2 | 3 |
| Carrier | 2 2 2 | 3 |
| Hangar | 4 1 | 3 |

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Artillery | 1 | 2 |
| Broadside | 2 | 3 |

**Titan sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Titan Bow | 1 | 6 |

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Titan Core | 4 | 6 |

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Titan Stern | 2 | 3 |

**Colossus sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Colossus | 1 | 6 |

**Juggernaut sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Juggernaut | 2 6 5 | 21 4 |

**Menacing corvette sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Brawler | 1 1 | 3 2 |
| Interceptor | 3 | 3 2 |

**Menacing destroyer sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Artillery | 1 2 | 3 2 |
| Multirole | 1 1 1 1 | 3 2 |

**Menacing cruiser sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Menacing Cruiser | 1 2 2 | 6 2 |

**Star-Eater sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Star-Eater | 1 4 3 9 6 6 | 20 4 |

**Nanite Swarmer sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Carrier | 1 | 1 |
| Gunship | 2 | 1 |
| Torpedo | 2 | 1 |
| Screen | 4 | 1 |

**Nanite Interdictor sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Carrier | 1 2 4 | 3 1 |
| Torpedo | 5 4 | 3 1 |

**Riddle escort sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Artillery Frame | 4 4 2 | 6 2 |
| Torpedo Frame | 4 4 3 | 6 2 |

**Enigma battlecruiser sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Artillery Frame | 2 4 2 2 | 8 3 |
| Torpedo Frame | 2 4 2 4 | 8 3 |

**Paradox titan sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Paradox Titan | 2 4 8 4 | 20 4 |

**Mauler sections**

| Name | Growth stage | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|---|
| Swarm | Juvenile | 1 1 | 2 1 |
| Mature | 2 1 | 4 1 | |
| Elder | 2 2 | 6 2 | |
| Picket | Juvenile | 1 1 | 2 1 |
| Mature | 2 1 | 4 1 | |
| Elder | 2 2 | 6 2 | |

**Weaver sections**

| Name | Growth stage | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|---|
| Buffer | Juvenile | 2 2 | 6 2 |
| Mature | 3 3 | 4 2 2 | |
| Elder | 4 4 | 2 4 3 | |
| Debuffer | Juvenile | 2 2 | 6 2 |
| Mature | 3 3 | 4 2 2 | |
| Elder | 4 4 | 2 4 3 | |

**Harbinger sections**

| Name | Growth stage | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|---|
| Picket | Juvenile | 2 4 | 8 2 |
| Mature | 3 6 | 3 3 2 | |
| Elder | 4 8 | 6 3 | |
| Artillery | Juvenile | 2 2 | 8 2 |
| Mature | 3 3 | 3 3 2 | |
| Elder | 4 4 | 6 3 | |

**Stinger sections**

| Name | Growth stage | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|---|
| Line | Juvenile | 6 3 | 5 1 |
| Mature | 9 | 7 2 | |
| Elder | 12 | 9 3 | |
| Artillery | Juvenile | 2 2 | 5 1 |
| Mature | 3 3 | 7 2 | |
| Elder | 4 4 | 9 3 | |

**Cipher Mauler sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Ancient Mauler | 2 2 4 | 8 2 |

**Quandary Weaver sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Ancient Weaver | 6 6 | 2 4 3 |

**Maze Harbinger sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Ancient Harbinger | 6 4 | 6 3 |

**Cryptic Stinger sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Ancient Stinger | 2 4 4 | 12 3 |

**Defense platform sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Light | 4 | 3 1 |
| Medium | 2 | 3 1 |
| Heavy | 1 | 3 1 |
| Point-Defense | 4 | 3 1 |
| Missile | 2 | 3 1 |
| Hangar | 1 | 3 1 |

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Light | 4 | 3 1 |
| Medium | 2 | 3 1 |
| Heavy | 1 | 3 1 |
| Point-Defense | 4 | 3 1 |
| Missile | 2 | 3 1 |
| Hangar | 1 | 3 1 |

**Ion Cannon sections**

| Name | Weapon Slots | Utility Slots |
|---|---|---|
| Ion Cannon Core | 1 | 6 3 |

## Auto-design

Initially all ship designs are created and updated automatically, although this behavior can be disabled by the player. Auto-design will design ships that spread their defenses and damage types evenly. Auto-design can also be given a ship role to create more specialized designs.

| Ship Role | Ship Sizes |
|---|---|
| **Screen** Screening ships carry point defense and flak, protecting the rest of the fleet from missiles, torpedoes, and strike craft. | Corvette, Destroyer, Mauler, Nanite Swarmer, Defense Platform |
| **Brawler** Brawlers are built for close fights, favoring high damage but short ranged weapons like autocannons and disruptors. | Corvette, Destroyer, Mauler, Deep Space Citadel |
| **Gunship** Gunships are intended to fight other ships of their size category, bristling with as many mid-ranged weapons as possible. | Corvette, Destroyer, Cruiser, Battleship, Titan, Stinger, Nanite Swarmer, Defense Platform |
| **Artillery** Artillery ships prefer long ranged missiles and direct fire weapons. They tend to have difficulty fighting smaller ships or those that get too close. | Corvette, Destroyer, Cruiser, Battleship, Titan, Harbinger, Stinger, Riddle Escort, Enigma Battlecruiser, Paradox Titan, Defense Platform, Deep Space Citadel, Juggernaut |
| **Torpedo** Torpedo ships use guided weapons which deal massive damage to large ships. | Frigate, Cruiser, Riddle Escort, Enigma Battlecruiser, Nanite Swarmer, Nanite Interdictor |
| **Energy Torpedo** Energy Torpedo ships will fill guided slots with Neutron or Proton Torpedoes, dealing extra damage to large ships. They tend to be vulnerable to ships that close the distance. | Frigate, Cruiser, Riddle Escort, Enigma Battlecruiser, Nanite Interdictor, Defense Platform |
| **Carrier** Carriers act as a launching platform for strike craft. | Cruiser, Battleship, Harbinger, Enigma Battlecruiser, Nanite Swarmer, Nanite Interdictor, Defense Platform, Deep Space Citadel, Juggernaut |

If a cloaking device powerful enough to be mounted on a ship size is available, that ship will also have a stealth variant for its roles. The stealth variant will add a cloaking device and use only armor for defense.